closes #72 add esub example article (#96)
pharmaverse/examples: esub/esub.qmd

## R Submissions Working Group

Within the R Consortium, the R Submissions WG have conducted several pilots to
provide open examples of submitting R-based clinical trial data/analysis packages
to the FDA.

Anyone new to R-based submissions should definitely check out the open materials
from this team [here](https://rconsortium.github.io/submissions-wg/).

Since these pilots laid the foundation, several major pharma companies have
submitted primarily using R to health authorities across the world, so this
article includes a mix of learnings from the pilots and real submissions.

## Submission Contents

The areas of eSubmission that pharmaverse packages are most useful for would be
data, readable code, and documentation.

Each of the sections below talk in more detail of these areas, plus specific
mention of validation which is a common topic raised around usage of open
source.

### Data

The main 2 forms of dataset for CDISC clinical trial submission are SDTM and
ADaM. Refer to the separate example articles on this site for how best to go
about producing these.

> For eSubmission the most common export format used to deliver these to health authorities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For eSubmission the most common transport file format used to deliver these to health authorities
```

`ADSL` but would be much more likely on a BDS dataset such as `ADLB` for a
large study.

```{r examples}
adsl_example <- pharmaverseadam::adsl %>%
  # Coerce variable type to match specification
  xportr_type(metacore) %>%
  # Assigns variable label from metacore specifications
  xportr_label(metacore) %>%
  # Assigns dataset label from metacore specifications
  xportr_df_label(metacore) %>%
  # Assigns length from the maximum length of any value of the variable as per FDA data minimisation guidance
  xportr_length(metadata = metacore, length_source = "data") %>%
  # Assigns variable format from metacore specifications
  xportr_format(metadata = metacore) %>%
  # Write xpt v5 transport file but split into smaller subsets if greater than 5GB
  # according to the FDA cutoff size
  xportr_write(file.path(dir, "adsl.xpt"), metadata = metacore, domain = "ADSL", max_size_gb = 5)
```

As an alternative to xpt, we also have `{datasetjson}` which enables the
emerging new submission data exchange standard Dataset-JSON detailed
[here](https://www.cdisc.org/standards/data-exchange/dataset-json). As this
package is still experimental, we don't include code examples here but over time

> and as momentum grows we can add extra examples to this article.

Reviewer: Ohhh  - can we link out to pilot 5 project? it will change over time but might be of interest for folks to follow https://rconsortium.github.io/submissions-pilot5-website/

### Readable Code

When using internal company-specific closed source tools and codebases, we
often face challenges around providing readable code to health authorities as

> internal 1-company solutions are by nature not easily accessible and understandable.

Reviewer: there is a 1 here??

This is one of the benefits of using open source codebases in the submission
setting as it enables review teams to look deeper into the functions used, plus
they have the same open solutions available to use themselves as part of their
review. As more of the industry embraces open source, we may even see more
harmonization of submission packages across the industry as the same packages
are re-used, and this should lead to greater familiarity from review teams
easing their critical submission dossier review.

The nature of R packages and functions, as well as influence from `{tidyverse}`,
has encouraged most pharmaverse package development teams to embrace modular
strategy to their code. So when you use packages like `{admiral}`, you'll see
that the ADaM templates have been built with readability in mind specifically to
aid with eSubmission.

### Documentation

When using R for submission there are some important recommendations around
documentation you should include as part of the eSubmission package. Most

> companies include these in the Reviewer's Guide documents (_the PHUSE Advance Hub

Reviewer: maybe another resource for re-envision ADRG? https://phuse-org.github.io/OSDocuMeta/

---
title: "eSubmission"
---

## Introduction

This article shares learnings from R and open source based submission experiences,
and how these can be achieved using pharmaverse packages in conjunction.

When considering such a submission, it is important to discuss this early on
with the regulatory agency during any pre-submission correspondence.

The main pharmaverse packages specifically supporting eSubmission are as follows: 

-   [`{xportr}`](https://atorus-research.github.io/xportr/): delivers the SAS transport file (XPT) and eSub checks.
-   [`{pkglite}`](https://merck.github.io/pkglite/): enables exchange of closed source R packages via text files.
-   [`{datasetjson}`](https://atorus-research.github.io/datasetjson/): experimental package to deliver Dataset-JSON.

> 

Reviewer 2: Hi, @rossfarrugia .  Thanks for allowing our review.  Could metacore and metatools be considered packages useful for R Submission as well?

```
Both {metacore} and {metatools} play a vital role in the open-source R landscape for regulatory submissions by empowering users to proactively manage data quality and conformance. By leveraging these tools, we can get closer to ensuring our submitted data aligns with cross-industry standards like CDISC and passes validation checks by tools such as Pinnacle 21.

- metacore (https://atorus-research.github.io/metacore/): This package provides a robust framework for defining and managing metadata, which is crucial for ensuring data structure and content adhere to regulatory guidelines. Its capabilities in defining data dictionaries, controlled terminologies, and variable attributes can greatly assist in the creation of submission-ready datasets.

- metatools (https://pharmaverse.github.io/metatools/): Developed within the Pharmaverse ecosystem, metatools offers a collection of utilities designed to work with metadata, including functionalities for data validation, transformation, and reporting. Its focus on practical applications for clinical data makes it a strong candidate for inclusion in our eSUB toolkit.
```

I see metacore is in the ADSL example below.

Author: I'll add a general paragraph here for other pharmaverse packages as trying to not repeat too much that's already in the ADaM example pages

- R version used
- Descriptions of the main open source R package used, the version of each that
you used, and where these are available from (especially if anywhere other than CRAN)
- Descriptions of any closed source packages used (see details below)
- Basic installation instructions of the R version used and how to install the
package versions that you used (e.g. from CRAN)

Here is an example extract of what the documentation of the open source packages
used might look like:

![Example Reviewer's Guide Table](ADRG.png){fig-align="center"}

For closed source packages, if you plan to submit the code then there are 2 main
options - `{pkglite}` to create txt files, or zip files (as were successfully
used in later R Submission WG pilots).

Here is an example taken from the R Submission WG pilot 1 around how they used
`pkglite::pack()` to provide packages as txt files. On the other side
`pkglite::unpack()` could then be used to unpack.

```{r pack, eval=FALSE}
library(pkglite)

# Using pkglite to pack proprietary R package and saved into ectd/r0pkg.txt
path$home %>%
  collate(file_ectd(), file_auto("inst")) %>%
  prune("R/zzz.R") %>%
  pack(output = "ectd/r0pkg.txt")

> ```

Reviewer 2: For these RG examples mentioned here, when submitting closed-source packages, here are the links to their respective ADRGs if anyone would like to see the actual examples.

Pilot 1, using {pkglite} - https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot1-to-fda/blob/main/m5/datasets/rconsortiumpilot1/analysis/adam/datasets/adrg.pdf
Pilot 3, using compressed .zip approach - https://github.com/RConsortium/submissions-pilot3-adam-to-fda/blob/main/m5/datasets/rconsortiumpilot3/analysis/adam/datasets/adrg.pdf

> It is worth monitoring this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For current ADRG guidance, regardless of the programming language used for regulatory submissions, ensuring your documentations meet the ADRG completion guidelines found here [PHUSE ADRG Package](https://advance.hub.phuse.global/wiki/spaces/WEL/pages/26804660/Analysis+Data+Reviewer+s+Guide+ADRG+Package)
 will be a great foundation to your open-source submission journey. As we are heading into this open-source R submission journey, it is worth monitoring this
[PHUSE Open-Source Metadata Documentation WG](https://phuse-org.github.io/OSDocuMeta/)
to see how guidance evolves in this documentation space.
```
